# ATAC-seq manual

* [Introduction to ATAC-seq](#introduction-to-atac-seq)
    + [Background](#background)
    + [Principle](#principle)
    + [Experimental Design](#experimental-design)
* [Pipelines for ATAC-seq](#pipelines-for-atac-seq)
    + [Quality Control](#quality-control)
    + [Trimming](#trimming)
    + [Alignment](#alignment)
    + [Post-alignment Filtering](#post-alignment-filtering)
    + [Accessible Peak calling](#accessible-peak-calling)
    + [Differential accessibility](#differential-accessibility)
    + [Footprint analysis](#footprint-analysis)
* [Reference](#reference)

> Last Update: Day Month Year

# Introduction to ATAC-seq

## Background

Assay for Transposase-Accessible Chromatin using sequencing (ATAC-Seq) is a method to investigate the accessibility of chromatin stucture using Tn5 transposase. Accessible chromatin are highly coupled with regulatory mechanisms of gene expression thus this method can contribute to the identification of regulatory elements such as promoter, enhancer and silencer regions. There is several different techniques developed for the same purpose of ATAC-seq but ATAC-seq shows to be a best option as it easier, faster and require less cells then other techniques. In the same time, ATAC-seq are able to provide short accessible region which is limited in other techniques. 

In eukaryotic organisms, genomes are packed and organised into nuclelosomes which forms the chromatin structure. A  nucleosome is a complex formed by eight histone proteins that is wrapped with ~147bp of DNA. When the DNA is being actively transcribed into RNA, the DNA will be opened and loosened from the nucleosome complex. Many factors, such as the chromatin structure, the position of the nucleosomes, and histone modifications, play an important role in the organization and accessibility of the DNA. Consequently, these factors are also important for the activation and inactivation of genes. In the same time, the change in structure also impacts on the transcription factors binding activity which may increase or decrease based on each TF nature.

## Principle

With ATAC-Seq, to find accessible (open) chromatin regions, the genome is treated with a hyperactive derivative of the Tn5 transposase. A transposase can bind to a transposable element, which is a DNA sequence that can change its position (jump) within a genome. During ATAC-Seq, the modified Tn5 inserts DNA sequences corresponding to truncated Nextera adapters into open regions of the genome and concurrently, the DNA is sheared by the transposase activity. The read library is then prepared for sequencing, including PCR amplification with full Nextera adapters and purification steps. Paired-end reads are recommended for ATAC-Seq for the reasons described here.

## Experimental Design

> Copied from [ATAC-seq Guidelines](https://informatics.fas.harvard.edu/atac-seq-guidelines.html)

### 1. Replicates

Same as all techniques, ATAC-seq requires biological replicates to provide accurate results. This ensures that any signals observed are due to biological effects rather then a single replicates handling or processing. To begin with, two replicates per experimental group are sufficient.

### 2. Controls

ATAC-seq may be provided with different type of controls. These includes the untreat control, the time zero control, or a simple reference control.
However, due to the expense of ATAC-seq, many research choose to simply sequence a normal genomic DNA extraction using other fragmentation protocols to collect regions that are problematic for sequencing or aligning. However, this has been covered by the blacklist project done by ENCODE providing a list of regions that may introduce these biases. 

### 3. PCR amplification

In preparing libraries for sequencing, the samples should be amplified using as few PCR cycles as possible. This helps to reduce PCR duplicates, which are exact copies of DNA fragments that can interfere with the biological signal of interest. Techniques such as ATAC-seq which uses an enzyme is well known to be suffering from duplication because of (a) PCR cycles or (b) the same region were extracted from many different cells.

### 4. Sequencing depth

The optimal sequencing depth varies based on the size of the reference genome and the degree of open chromatin expected. For studies of human samples, Buenrostro et al. (2015) recommend more than 50 million mapped reads per sample.

### 5. Sequencing mode

For ATAC-seq, use paired-end sequencing, for several reasons.

 - More sequence data leads to better alignment results. Many genomes contain numerous repetitive elements, and failing to align reads to certain genomic regions unambiguously renders those regions less accessible to the assay. Additional sequence data, such as with paired-end sequencing, helps to reduce these alignment ambiguities.

 - With ATAC-seq, we are interested in knowing both ends of the DNA fragments generated by the assay, since the ends indicate where the transposase inserted. This can be done only with paired-end reads. A single-end read defines only one end of the fragment, and, although computational methods to infer fragment lengths from single-end reads exist, they tend to be inaccurate.

 - PCR duplicates are identified more accurately. As noted above, PCR duplicates are artifacts of the procedure, and they should be removed as part of the analysis pipeline (see below for more details). However, computational programs that remove PCR duplicates (e.g. Genrich) typically identify duplicates based on comparing ends of aligned reads. With single-end reads, there is only one position to compare, and so any reads whose 5' ends match are considered duplicates. Thus, many false positives may result, and perfectly good reads are removed from further analysis. On the other hand, after paired-end sequencing, both ends of the original DNA fragments are defined. To be declared a duplicate, both ends of one fragment need to match both ends of another fragment, which is far less likely to occur by chance. Therefore, paired-end sequencing leads to fewer false positives.

### 6. Mitochondria

It is a well-known problem that ATAC-seq datasets usually contain a large percentage of reads (30~80%) that are derived from mitochondrial DNA. Since there are no ATAC-seq peaks of interest in the mitochondrial genome, these reads are discarded in the computational analysis and thus represent a waste of sequencing resources. The Omni-ATAC method uses detergents to remove mitochondria from the samples prior to sequencing and is likely to be accessible for most researchers.

# Pipelines for ATAC-seq

Currectly there is many different pipelines for ATAC-seq but are limited with number of usable packages.

## Quality Control

> Section update: Day Month Year

### Fastqc

As we have mentioned, ATAC-seq is based on Tn5 transposase which will introduce certain biases. In general cases, we expect the 3' of reads to contain a bias in the sequence context as Tn5 transposase are known to priotise the binding towards a specific regions. The following is example of the region.

## Trimming

> Section update: Day Month Year

For reads derived from short DNA fragments, the 3' ends may contain portions of the Illumina sequencing adapter. This adapter contamination may prevent the reads from aligning to the reference genome and adversely affect the downstream analysis. If you suspect that your reads may be contaminated with adapters (either from the FastQC report ["Overrepresented sequences" or "Adapter content" sections], or from the size distribution of your sequencing libraries), you should run an adapter removal tool. 

### Trim_galore & Cutadapt



## Alignment

> Section update: 11 April 2023

The alignemnt of ATAC-seq remains to be the few main alignment tools for genome alignment including bowtie2 and bwa.

## Post-alignment Filtering

> Section update: Day Month Year

As ATAC-seq is a very noisy technology, we will need to be able to include sufficient quality datasets
MT reeads

## Accessible Peak calling

> Section update: Day Month Year


## Differential accessibility

> Section update: Day Month Year

## Footprint analysis

> Section update: Day Month Year




# Reference

This ATAC-seq library combined many information (or copied) from several tutorials. All involved tutorials are listed below:

https://genomebiology.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s13059-020-1929-3
https://training.galaxyproject.org/training-material/topics/epigenetics/tutorials/atac-seq/tutorial.html
https://nbis-workshop-epigenomics.readthedocs.io/en/latest/content/tutorials/atacseq_tutorials.html
https://bioinformaticsworkbook.org/dataAnalysis/ATAC-seq/ATAC_tutorial.html#gsc.tab=0
https://tobiasrausch.com/courses/atac/

Buenrostro et al. 2013, the first paper on the ATAC-Seq method
